Common mistakes in React (#1550)
enkidevs/curriculum: javascript/react/common-mistakes-in-react/dont-mutate-state.md

---
author: kapnobatai136

levels:

  - basic
  
  - medium
  
aspects:

  - workout

  - deep

type: normal

category: tip

---

# Don't mutate state

---
## Content

> Now that you know how to handle yourself with React, it is time to learn about some of the most common mistakes and how to avoid them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you know how to start using React, it is time to learn about some of the most common mistakes and how to avoid them.
```

One of the most common mistakes one can make when using React is trying to directly modify the `state`. In a previous workout we have discussed how the `state` is considered immutable, and some methods of updating arrays or objects were presented. Consider the following example:

```js
const updateFeaturesList = (e, idx) => {
  listFeatures[idx].checked =
    e.target.checked;
  setListFeatures(listFeatures);
};
```

> Although this code might seem correct at a first glance, the UI won't reflect this because the `state` is updated with the same object reference which doesn't trigger a re-render. Because the `state` has an asynchronous nature, mutating it might result in later `state` updates overriding the changes you have made directly. When using functional components, use the setter method returned by `useState()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this code might seem correct at a first glance, the UI won't actually reflect this change because the `state` is updated on the same object reference, which doesn't trigger a re-render. Because the `state` updates can happen asynchronously (React might do this outside of our control), mutating it might result in later `state` updates overriding the changes you have made directly. To circumvent this when using functional components, use the setter method returned by `useState()`:
```

```js
const updateFeaturesList = (e, idx) => {
  const { checked } = e.target;
  setListFeatures(features => {
    return features.map(
      (feature, index) => {
        if (idx === index) {
          feature = { ...feature, checked };
        }
        return feature;
      }
    );
  });
};
```

> Note that by using the `.map()` array prototype and object spread we are ensuring that the original `state` items are not changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that by using the `.map()` array method (which creates a new array) and object spread (which creates a new object) we are ensuring that the original `state` items are not changed.
```

Reviewer: The `.map` is not an "array prototype", it's a method on the array prototype (but I rephrased above to not mention that all 🤷‍♂ )
